 Interventions for Rapid Global Change




Causal Loop Diagrams:
  A Short Handbook


    Michael Lawrence,
 Polycrisis Research Fellow




    www.cascadeinstitute.org
                                         Summary



“Systems mapping” encompasses various graphical techniques that help us to think
through our mental model of a system, increase our understanding of a system, and
                                          1
communicate our knowledge to others. A causal loop diagram is just one type of
systems map, but an especially useful one, because it captures the feedback loops
that constitute the basic structure of the system and shape its key behaviours. Causal
loop diagrams (CLDs) do not require any specialized knowledge but can be counter-
intuitive in some respects. This handbook explains how to read and draw causal loop
diagrams, clarifies some common sources of confusion, and offers advice for using
this tool most effectively.

Like many other forms of systems diagrams (and network diagrams), CLDs are
composed of elements and connections. But unlike many others, CLDs also include
feedback loops that connect elements in a circular pattern. This handbook explains
each of these three features, provides step-by-step instructions for drawing CLDs,
then presents three examples of CLDs that elucidate crucial real-world phenomena.




1 For an excellent survey of different system mapping techniques, see: Barbrook-Johnson and Penn, 2022,
in the Recommended Resources section below.
                                                                                                          2
                                                             Contents




Elements: .................................................................................................................................................. 4

Connections: ............................................................................................................................................ 4

Positive feedback loops: ...................................................................................................................... 6

Negative feedback loops: .................................................................................................................. 10

Multifactor feedback loops: ............................................................................................................... 13

Step-by-step instructions: ................................................................................................................... 16

Example 1: the security dilemma: ...................................................................................................... 19

Example 2: the arctic ice albedo feedback: ................................................................................. 20

Example 3: solutions that backfire: ................................................................................................. 22

Recommended resources: ............................................................................................................... 24




                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                   ELEMENTS

Elements are the key variables in a system—that is, the causal factors that are most
central to its behaviours. They might encompass “stocks” (such as available resources),
“levels” (such as the amount of trust in government), “shocks” to the system (such as
extreme weather events), or myriad other relevant causal factors. The one major
constraint the CLD methodology imposes on the identification of elements is that these
variables must be able to increase and/or decrease. A given actor—say, the Canadian
government, for example—would not fit as an element in a CLD, but the Canadian
government’s power and its budget would both fit, as they can rise and fall over time in
relation to other causal factors. Elements are presented as words in a CLD, often inside
shapes, and connected by arrows. If helpful, you can use different shapes and colors to
distinguish different types of elements.




                                CONNECTIONS

Causal loop diagrams involve two types of connection: positive causal relationships and
negative causal relationships. The Figures below (including those in the sections on
positive and negative feedback loops) show elements expanding or contracting in
relation to one another in order to illustrate these two types of causal relationships.
Actual CLDs, however, do not depict variables as expanding and contracting in this way;
they leave it to the viewer to mentally interpret the ways in which variables increase and
decrease in relation to each other.




                                                                                             4
Positive causal relationships are              Figure 1: Positive causal relationships

depicted as an arrow with a plus (+) sign         1a
above it (Figure 1a) that connects two
elements. In positive relationships,
                                                  1b
cause and effect change in the same
direction: when the cause increases in
strength, the effect increases in strength                 If A increases, then B increases
(Figure 1b); when the cause decreases,
                                                  1c
the effect decreases (Figure 1c). The
cause always precedes the effect in
time.                                                     If A decreases, then B decreases




                                             Figure 2: Negative causal relationships
Negative causal relationships are
                                             2a
depicted as an arrow with a minus (-)
sign above it (Figure 2a) that connects
two elements. In negative relationships,
                                             2b
cause and effect change in opposite
directions: when the cause increases in
strength, the effect decreases in
                                                       If A increases, then B decreases
strength (Figure 2b); when the cause
                                             2c
decreases, the effect increases (Figure
2c).

                                                       If A decreases, then B increases




                                                                                              5
                           POSITIVE FEEDBACK LOOPS

Feedback loops are chains of positive and negative causal relationships in which an
initial cause produces an effect or (or series of effects) that has an impact on the initial
cause, thereby forming a causal loop. There are two types of feedback loops: positive
feedback loops and negative feedback loops.


In a positive, or self-reinforcing, feedback loop      Figure 3: A positive feedback loop
                                                       working in an increasing direction
(Figure 3a), a change in the cause creates a
similar change in the effect, which then               3a
intensifies the change in the cause, which then
intensifies the change in the effect, and so on.
An increase in A (Figure 3b) causes an increase        3b
in B (Figure 3c), and that increase in B causes a
further increase in A (Figure 3d), which causes a
further increase in B (Figure 3e), which causes
an additional increase in A (Figure 3f), and so        3c
on.

A positive feedback loop operating in an
                                                       3d
increasing direction produces runaway growth.

Compound interest is a good example of a
simple positive feedback loop, where A
                                                       3e
represents your account balance and B
represents the amount of interest you earn
annually on the money in your account.
Increasing your account balance (Figure 3b)
                                                       3f
increases the amount of interest you earn
(Figure 3c), which increases your account
balance (Figure 3d), which increases the
interest earned (Figure 3e), which increases
your balance (Figure 3f), and so on.




                                                                                               6
Figure 4 shows the runaway, exponential growth on an initial account balance of $100
with an annual interest rate of 5%. Left alone, the balance grows to over $162 in ten
years, about $340 in twenty-five years, and nearly $1150 in fifty years. Even though the
interest rate remains constant, the account balance grows in a non-linear manner.



  Figure 4: Compound interest




                                                                                           7
Figure 3 shows a positive feedback loop proceeding               Figure 5: A positive feedback loop
                                                                 working in a decreasing direction
in an increasing direction; but positive feedback loops
can also proceed in a decreasing direction, as              5a

depicted in Figure 5.

A decrease in A (Figure 5b) causes a decrease in B
                                                            5b
(Figure 5c), and that decrease in B causes a further
decrease in A (Figure 5D), which causes an additional
decrease in B (Figure 5e), and so on.
                                                            5c
A positive feedback loop operating in a decreasing
direction produces a spiral down to nothing.

The loss of trust between two people may unfold in a        5d
positive feedback loop working in a decreasing
direction. Imagine A represents the trust I show in you,
and B represents the trust that you show in me. If I
show you less trust than before (Figure 5b), it may         5e

cause you to show less trust in me (Figure 5c), which
causes me to show less trust in you (Figure 5d), which
causes you to show less trust in me (Figure 5e) and so
on until we do not trust each other at all.


      Source of common confusion 1: positive and negative causal relationships versus
      feedback loops

      We use the terms “positive” and “negative” in reference to both causal relationships
      and feedback loops, so we need to remember that causal relationships and feedback
      loops are two different things. When they involve more than two causal factors (see
      the section “Multifactor feedback loops” below), positive feedback loops may be
      composed of both positive and negative causal relationships, as can negative
      feedback loops. Indeed, as shown in the example below, a positive feedback loop
      can involve only negative causal relationships. And negative feedback loops can be
      composed of nearly all positive relationships (but must have at least one negative
      causal relationship, for reasons explained below). So when we use the terms positive
      and negative, we have to be clear about whether we are referring to a single
      relationship or an entire feedback loop.


                                                                                                      8
                                                               Figure 6: A positive feedback loop with
In the positive feedback loops presented                       two negative causal relationships
above, both causal relationships are positive.                 6a
But a positive feedback loop can also involve
only negative causal relationships (Figure 6)
or combinations of positive and negative
causal relations (see Figure 9 below). Here, an                6b
increase in A (Figure 6b) causes B to
decrease (Figure 6c). Because the causal
relationship from A to B is negative, A and B
change in opposite directions. The decrease                    6c
in B (Figure 6c) then causes a further increase
in A (Figure 6d) because the causal
relationship from B to A is also negative. The
increase in A (Figure 6d) then causes a further                6d
decrease in B (Figure 6e), and so on.
In this positive feedback loop, one variable
rises as the other falls.

It could also go in the other direction, where                 6e
an initial decrease in A causes an increase in
B, which further decreases A, and so on.



A good example of this type of positive feedback is the “Matthew effect” wherein the
rich get richer by making the poor even poorer.2 If A represents the resources held by
the rich and B the resources held by the poor, then an increase in resources (Figure
6b) held by the rich allows them to pursue additional opportunities and develop new
forms of exploitation, capturing (diminishing) the resources held by the poor (Figure
6c). That transfer of resources to the rich (Figure 6d) enables additional advantages
with which to capture even more resources from the poor (Figure 6e). The result is a
vicious cycle of growing inequality.




2 The Matthew Effect is named for the New Testament gospel of Matthew, 25:29: “For whosoever hath, to
him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken
away even that he hath.”

                                                                                                         9
                      NEGATIVE FEEDBACK LOOPS

                                                          Figure 7: A negative feedback loop
Where positive feedback loops amplify an initial
                                                          7a
change (into runaway growth, a spiral to nothing, or
a paired rise and fall), negative feedback loops
counterbalance, or cancel-out, an initial change and
restore a system to an equilibrium state. They are,       7b
therefore, sometimes called “balancing feedback
loops.”

                                                          7c
A thermostat that regulates the temperature of a
room provides a good example of a negative
feedback loop (Figure 7a). Let A represent the
temperature of the air in the room, and B represent       7d
the temperature of air coming out of a vent (from
either a furnace or air conditioner) into the room. If
the room temperature rises (A in Figure 7b), the
thermostat triggers the air conditioner to lower the      7e

temperature of air coming out of the vent (B in
Figure 7c). This is a negative relationship from A to
B; the two temperatures move in opposite
                                                          7f
directions. The drop in air temperature from the
vent then causes the room temperature to decrease
as well (Figure 7d). This is a positive relationship
from B to A; the two temperatures move in the same
                                                          7g
direction. The room returns to its set temperature,
the thermostat stops the air conditioner, and the
vent temperature also returns to room temperature
(Figure 7e).                                              7h

If the room temperature drops (A in Figure 7f), the
thermostat triggers the furnace to increase the
temperature of vented air (B in figure 7g).

The extra heat from the vent then raises the temperature of the room (Figure 7h). And the
thermostat turns the furnace off so that both the room air and vent air temperatures return to
their initial, programmed setting (Figure 7a).

Balancing feedback loops restore a variable to a certain value after a disturbance, and
thereby maintain consistent conditions.
                                                                                                 10
In the example above, the thermostat
cancels out a change to the set                   Figure 8: An oscillating negative feedback loop
temperature then switches off the causal          8a
connections (the air conditioner or furnace)
until another change in room temperature
occurs. Other negative feedback loops
produce continuing oscillations instead of        8b
the kind of static equilibrium we see in the
thermostat example.

The fluctuations between predator and             8c
prey populations in an ecosystem (Figure
8a) provide a good illustration of an
oscillating negative feedback. Imagine A
represents the population of a prey               8d
species (such as rabbits) and B represents
the population of a predator species (such
as wolves). An increase in the prey
population (Figure 8b) provides more food
                                                  8e
to the predator population, enabling it to
breed and grow in numbers (Figure 8c).
But the larger predator population over-
consumes (reduces) the prey population
                                                  8f
(Figure 8d), and the decrease in food then
causes part of the predator population to
die off (Figure 8e). The decline of the
predator population enables more prey to
grow (figure 8f) and the cycle repeats.           8g


The result is a fluctuating pattern where
one variable is rising as the other is falling,
and vice versa. This represents a dynamic
equilibrium, because it is a persistent
pattern but does not settle at one value
(such as the temperature setting of the
thermostat).


                                                                                                    11
        Source of common confusion 2: positive and negative as empirical vs. normative
        descriptors 3
        In everyday conversation, we use the terms “positive” and “negative” to mean good and
        bad, respectively. In regard to the relationships and feedback loops of CLDs, however, the
        terms “positive” and “negative” do not indicate such value judgements. The terms are
        used in an empirical rather than normative manner, concerning “what is” rather than “what
        ought to be.” The terms simply indicate whether relationships go in the same direction
        (positive) or opposite directions (negative), and whether a feedback loop is self-reinforcing
        (positive) or self-balancing (negative). Positive feedbacks can be desirable or undesirable,
        as can negative feedbacks; it depends on the system in question. Desirable positive
        feedback loops are often called “virtuous cycles” and harmful positive feedback loops are
        often called “vicious cycles,” but in both cases the feedback loop is positive (self-
        reinforcing). The table below emphasizes this distinction by providing additional examples.




                                                                                  Impacts of Feedback


                                                                Beneficial                                   Harmful




                   Positive (self-reinforcing)
                                                 A desirable change in one thing              A harmful change in one thing produces a
                                                 produces a desirable change in second        harmful change in second thing, which
                                                 thing, which increases the desirable         increases the harmful change in the first
                                                 change in the first thing, which increases   thing, which increases the harmful change
                                                 the desirable change in the second, and      in the second, and so on. We saw this
                                                 so on. We saw this scenario in the           scenario in the example of the Matthew
                                                 example of compound interest, where          effect in which the rich get richer by
                                                 our bank account balance and the             making the poor poorer.




Type of Feedback
                                                 interest we earn amplify one another.




                   Negative (self-balancing)
                                                 A shift away from a desirable state          Shifts away from an undesirable status
                                                 triggers counter-acting forces that          quo trigger counter-acting forces that
                                                 restore the desirable state. We saw this     restore the undesirable status quo.
                                                 scenario in the example of the               Rebellions against government
                                                 thermostat that maintains comfortable        repression, for example, may temporarily
                                                 living conditions by counteracting rises     increase popular rights and freedoms, but
                                                 and falls of temperature.                    often trigger government crackdowns
                                                                                              that reverse these gains.




3 The terms “positive” and “negative” can be confusing in multiple ways, so some authors use alternative
terminology. The terms “positive” and “negative,” however, are so well established and commonly used that you
must understand them if you are to accurately interpret and describe many causal loop diagrams.
                                                                                                                                          12
                   MULTIFACTOR FEEDBACK LOOPS


The feedback loops examined so far have
involved only two elements, but feedback                             Figure 9a: Feedback loop with four
loops often involve many causal factors in                                      causal factors

a long chain of cause and effect that
cycles back to the element that initially
sets change in motion. There must be
such a cycle for there to be a feedback
loop.

Figure 9a presents a four-factor feedback
loop. To determine whether it is a positive
feedback loop or a negative feedback
loop, we can imagine an initial increase in
causal factor A and think through the
changes that result for the other three
factors (Figure 9b, moving clockwise
through the relationships).


                 Figure 9b: Feedback loop with four causal factors and an initial increase




                                                                                                          13
In Figure 9b, the initial increase in A sets off a series of changes that amplify the
change in A. This is a positive (self-reinforcing) feedback loop. We get the same
amplification of the initial change if we start by decreasing (rather than increasing) A
(Figure 9c). Note that Figures 9b and 9c, unlike the ones above, do not graphically
depict the increase or decrease of each element (only the initial change). These
Figures instead describe such relationships textually. Following a commonly used
convention, the “R” symbol in the middle labels the feedback as a reinforcing
(positive) one.




                 Figure 9c: Feedback loop with four causal factors and an initial decrease




                                                                                             14
Figure 10 presents a five-factor feedback
                                                    Figure 10: A feedback loop with five factors
loop. Is it a positive or negative one? We
can think it through step by step like we
did with Figure 9, or we can take a
shortcut. A quicker way to determine
whether a feedback loop is positive or
negative is to multiply the plus and minus
signs one by one through the loop to
determine whether the product—and the
feedback loop—is positive or negative.




A negative times a positive is a negative, times a positive is negative, times a negative is
positive, times a negative is negative. This is a negative feedback loop. Whether A
increases or decrease, it sets off a chain of cause and effect that counteract the initial
change.

Alternatively, we can count the number of minus signs in the feedback loop. If there is an
odd number of minus signs, it is a negative feedback loop. If there is an even number of
minus signs, or no minus signs, then it is a positive feedback loop.




                                                                                                   15
                           STEP-BY-STEP INSTRUCTIONS
The process of creating causal loop diagrams involves three broad stages that often overlap
in practice. In each stage, we present tips derived from our own experience that may help
improve your diagrams.4

  1. Identify the relevant elements (causal factors) and connections (causal relationships).

A CLD that includes every element and connection in a system will be utterly illegible and
practically useless. A helpful CLD will focus instead on the causal factors and relationships
that are most influential upon the system behaviour or aspect of the system you are
investigating, acknowledging that the diagram is a simplified representation of a much more
complex reality. We have found that CLDs with more than twelve elements tend to
overwhelm viewers and lead to more confusion than understanding.

Here are five tips to help you most constructively identify and label system elements:
   Recall from the Elements section above that an element can be any causal factor that
   shapes system behaviour, provided that it can increase and decrease. A factor that
   cannot increase or decrease—for example, a particular actor—will not work in a CLD but
   may be reformulated in a way that does—as a particular actor’s power, for example,
   which can rise and fall.
   Each element should be distinct (separate, non-redundant, and logically independent)
   from the other elements—that is, not just a slightly different version of another element.
   If a CLD of a geopolitical system includes the elements “economic power” and “gross
   domestic product,” for example, we might find these causal factors to be redundant and
   difficult to distinguish. It would be better to collapse them into a single element.
   Elements should be labelled as things rather than the absence of things. For example,
   use the variable “polarization” rather than “lack of political unity,” and “trust” rather than
   “absence of trust.”
   Do not label your variables with adjectives that indicate increase or decrease. For
   example, use “cooperation” rather than “rising cooperation” or “declining cooperation.”
   This and the previous convention allow the arrows to indicate the directionality of
   change rather than building it into the elements.
   Label elements as concisely and specifically as possible to make your diagram easily
   legible. Instead of “possibility a country will launch a first strike using nuclear weapons,”
   for example, use the label “risk of nuclear warfare.” You can elaborate and clarify your
   labels in the narrative that accompanies the diagram.
   4 This section is indebted to Barbrook-Johnson and Penn (2022, pp. 51-54), who set out seven steps for
   creating causal loop diagrams.
                                                                                                            16
To identify the (twelve-or-so) most important causal factors and the relationships between
them, you can draw upon information about the system from a variety of sources,
including surveys, expert elicitation, literature scans, intuitions, participatory discussions
with stakeholders, datasets, and quantitative or qualitative studies. In this first stage, your
goal is to produce an inventory of relevant causal factors and causal relationships to be
included in your CLD.

     2) Lay out the elements and draw the (positive and negative) causal
     relationships (arrows) between them.

Where the first stage is about consolidating your knowledge of the system, the second
stage is about drawing your CLD in a way that most clearly and accurately represents
that knowledge. You can draw your CLD by hand (which may be easiest way to
produce the first few—inevitably messy—drafts) or with a software. We produced all the
diagrams in this handbook using Microsoft PowerPoint, but you may want to explore
more specialized software, such as Vensim or Kumu.

To the extent that elements can be prioritized, start by laying out those at the top of
your inventory, draw the connections between them, then rearrange the elements and
connections to be as clearly organized as possible. Add additional elements and
connections and continue to reorganize them as necessary. A viewer friendly CLD will
avoid criss-crossing arrows, which will likely require you to reconfigure your layout
several times, and some intersections may be unavoidable. Feedback loops should be
readily visible and labelled as positive or negative (R or B, respectively). Note, however,
that not all causal factors must be part of a feedback loop; some may simply affect, or
be affected by, other factors that are part of a loop (see example 3 below).

With each draft of your CLD, you should go back to your information sources and solicit
others’ reactions to verify that your visualization captures the systemic behaviour you
are investigating. Revise as needed. You may find that you have to add additional
elements and connections to improve the accuracy of your CLD, or you may find that
some elements and connections are not relevant to your concerns and can be removed
to make the diagram more focused and concise. This second stage is an iterative
process that generally involves several rounds of visual rearrangement, verification, and
revision.




                                                                                                  17
3) Analyze and interpret the diagram

Articulate a narrative that explains the causal relationships of your CLD in a logical,
step-by-step manner. A crucial part of the analysis is to identify the feedback loops and
consider whether they tend to keep a system at equilibrium or promote runaway
change. Your narrative should ultimately explain how the elements, connections, and
feedback loops generate the systemic behaviours you are investigating. It should
consider how the system will change or resist change amidst shifting circumstances.
And it should help you to develop strategies to alter or maintain system behaviours.

A helpful next step is to identify which elements are most vulnerable, and which are
most influential. Vulnerable elements are those that are most highly affected by other
elements—that have the most arrows pointing to them. Vulnerability may indicate that a
variable is over-determined and thus especially difficult to change. Influential elements
are those that most influence other elements—that have the most arrows pointing out
from them. These elements may represent the most significant drivers of system
behaviour and important sites for intervention.

The basic logic of CLDs suggests three broad strategies by which to intervene in the
system to change its behaviour. First, you can add or strengthen an element, or remove
or weaken another. Introducing the element “accountability” to a governance system by
implementing the appropriate policies and institutional reforms, for example, may
diminish the element “corruption.” Restricting the element “backdoor lobbying” could
amplify the change.

Second, you can introduce new connections between elements, or eliminate existing
connections, to change the way these variables behave. Proactive vocational and
retraining initiatives, for example, might build a two-way, positive connection between
the elements “employment” and “green energy infrastructure” while weakening the
connection between “employment” and “fossil fuel infrastructure.”

And third, you can change the valence of a causal relationship from positive to
negative, or negative to positive, to alter the chains of cause and effect and perhaps
even flip a feedback loop from positive to negative, or negative to positive. Public
opinion may rapidly flip, for example, from supporting foreign interventions to opposing
them.



                                                                                            18
      Once you have completed your CLD, finally, you can use it as a stepping stone to other,
      more formalized methods of systems analysis. By quantifying the variables and their
      relationships, you can translate your CLD into the mathematical models of Systems
                                                                                              5
      Dynamics to simulate the system’s behaviours, as well as its responses to interventions.
       And even rough qualitative and quantitative estimates of causal relationships can be
      entered into a Cross Impact Balance matrix to test the stability of different system
                6
      scenarios. But these next steps require a strong facility with causal loop diagramming,
      and some real-world examples might help develop this capability.



                        EXAMPLE 1: THE SECURITY DILEMMA

    In the security dilemma, one country’s decision to increase its military forces causes a
    second country to feel increasingly threatened. Consequently, the second country
    increases its military forces, and in so doing, increases the first country’s perception of
    threat. The first country then further increases its military forces, and the cycle escalates
    until one event or other triggers a war that neither country actually wants.


                                             Figure 11: The security dilemma




5
  For an overview of Systems Dynamics, see: Barbrook-Johnson and Penn (2022: pp. 113-138).
  For an introduction to Cross Impact Balance Analysis, see: Wolfgang Weimer-Jehle (2006).
6 “Cross-Impact Balances: A System-Theoretical Approach to Cross-Impact Analysis,” Technological Forecasting and
  Social Change, vol. 73, pp. 334-361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2005.06.005.
                                                                                                                   19
This positive feedback, however, can also work in the other direction. One country may
decrease its military forces to make a second country feel less threatened, so that the
second country is also willing to reduce its military forces, reducing the first country’s
perception of threat, and so on. This positive feedback loop working in the decreasing
direction captures the basic logic behind many disarmament and mutual-reassurance
treaties, such as the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties signed by the United States and
the Soviet Union to reduce their nuclear arsenals (to mutually agreed levels; the
positive feedback did not proceed to total disarmament).


      EXAMPLE 2: THE ARCTIC ICE ALBEDO FEEDBACK

Another important real-world example of a feedback loop is the arctic ice albedo
feedback. “Albedo” is a measure of how much incoming light a substance reflects, rather
than absorbs. Ice, with its bright white color, has a high albedo because it reflects a high
proportion of incoming sunlight back out into space. Open seawater and exposed
landmasses have lesser albedos because they reflect less sunlight back out into space,
and instead absorb more of that sunlight as heat.

As the Earth’s temperature rises due to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, arctic
ice begins to melt, covering less of the Earth’s surface. As the ice melts, exposed open
seawater and exposed landmass both increase in area. Because water and land have
lesser albedos than ice, the Earth’s overall albedo – its reflectivity – decreases. As the
Earth absorbs more sunlight as heat, the temperature of the climate increases,
escalating the cycle.
                          Figure 12a: The arctic ice albedo feedback




                                                                                               20
Notice that there are actually two positive feedback loops depicted in this diagram: R1,
which involves increasingly exposed sea water, and R2, which involves increasingly
exposed landmass. And even though all the causal relationships (signs) in this diagram
are negative, the feedback loops are positive. Through these loops the earth’s
temperature drives its own increase, once set off by human emissions. It is a dangerous,
self-reinforcing chain of events.

Some scientists hypothesize that millions of years ago, this same positive feedback
worked in the other direction: declining temperatures expanded ice cover and thus
reduced the area of open water and landmasses. The Earth’s albedo increased, and thus
caused a further decrease in planetary temperature, creating a “snowball Earth” state.


                Figure 12b: The arctic ice albedo feedback with a balancing feedback loop




The arctic ice albedo effect also involves a negative feedback loop, labelled B1 above.
As the earth’s temperature increases so too does evaporation and cloud cover. Some
clouds reflect more sunlight back into space (than exposed sea water and landmass),
thus raising the Earth’s overall albedo, and decreasing the planetary temperature.
Unfortunately, this negative feedback is too small in magnitude to counteract the overall
warming driven by the positive feedback loops.



                                                                                            21
              EXAMPLE 3: SOLUTIONS THAT BACKFIRE

In his book Systems Thinking for Systems Change, systems thinker David Peter Stroh
identifies a number of systems “pathologies” by which a system’s structure resists efforts
to change system behaviours and thereby prevents individuals and organizations from
attaining their goals. One system pathology that often afflicts policymaking is what Stroh
calls “solutions that backfire”.


                               Figure 13a: Solutions that backfire




 When the symptoms of a social problem grow (top-left), policymakers often pursue a
 quick-fix solution that reduces the symptoms. This creates a negative, self-cancelling
 feedback loop (B1). The symptoms may recur, but additional applications of the quick-fix
 solution diminish them.

 Over time, however, the quick fix solution actually worsens the underlying causes of the
 problem (the dashes on the arrow between these two elements indicates a delay). As
 those root causes increase, so too do the symptoms of the problem. Policymakers
 continue to implement the quick-fix solution to temporarily reduce symptoms of the
 problem, but the problem keeps coming back even worse. This creates a positive
 feedback loop (R1) between the symptoms of the problem, the quick-fix solution, and the
 root causes of the problem.



                                                                                             22
As the root causes of the problem grow, and as policymakers become more deeply
invested in the quick-fix solution, the possibilities of implementing an actual solution that
addresses the root causes diminish (far right). Note, however, that the declining possibility
of a real solution is not a feedback loop because it is not part of a complete causal circuit.

Tough-on-crime policies provide an unfortunately apt example of a solution that backfires.
These policies respond to crime by increasing prison sentences (alongside other punitive
responses). Crime may decline for a while, but tough-on-crime policies do not remedy the
socio-economic factors that drive criminal behaviour. In fact, imprisonment often worsens
such factors by producing even more hardened criminals who have less opportunity to
reintegrate into law-abiding society. Once they are freed, many re-offend. As crime recurs,
people remain ideologically committed to even harsher punishments, while the socio-
economic drivers of criminality continue to worsen, so that a real solution becomes less
and less likely.

A real, lasting solution to crime would reduce the root causes of criminality, as depicted in
Figure 13b below. Effective policies might include social welfare provisions, community-
based policing, rehabilitation programs in and out of prisons, and restorative justice
measures. These policies add a new element (a different approach) to the system and
may weaken the connection between “symptoms” and “quick-fix solution.” As indicated
by the dashes on the arrow between real solutions and root causes, however, these
policies often take time to show results. They require long-term commitments and large
amounts of resources. For these reasons, real solutions may be politically unpopular and
prematurely abandoned so that criminality persists, and the favored quick-fix solution
continues to backfire.

                       Figure 13b: A real solution vs. a solution that backfires




                                                                                                 23
                          RECOMMENDED RESOURCES


   Pete Barbrook-Johnson and Alexandra S. Penn (2022). Systems Mapping: How to Build and
   Use Causal Models of Systems. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave-Macmillan.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-01919-7.

   Donella Meadows (2008). Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Edited by Diana Wright. White River
   Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.

   David Peter Stroh (2015). Systems Thinking for Social Change: A Practical Guide to Solving
   Complex Problems, Avoiding Unintended Consequences, and Achieving Lasting Results.
   White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.

The resources below present particularly powerful and impressive uses of causal loop
diagrams:

   Fanny Groundstroem and Sirkku Juhola (2021). “Using Systems Thinking and Causal Loop
   Diagrams to Identify Cascading Climate Change Impacts on Bioenergy Supply Systems,”
   Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-021-
   09967-0.

   Catherine E. Richards, Richard C. Lupton, and Julian M. Allwood (2021). “Re-Framing the
   Threat of Global Warming: An Empirical Causal Loop Diagram of Climate Change, Food
   Insecurity, and Societal Collapse,” Climatic Change, vol. 164, no. 49.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-021-02957-w.




                                                                                                 24
